《Yea, though I walk...》
Hammond & Loewen


chapter1 

Despite a lifelong resistance to the term, "missionary“ seemed part of my DNA. My dad, Percy Bromley, was born in India while his parents worked there- -as senior missionaries. As a young adult, he was interested in en fut a Boll agricultural experience and a friend encouraged him to apply his he for work on the McElheran farm located near Three Hills, C Alberta, Canada. It also happened to be the center for a fledgling Bible School, eventually growing into the renowned Prairie Bible Institute (PBI), now Prairie College, which has a strong missionary emphasis. 

Along with his farm chores, Peroy errolled as a studeng. Reading books while driving the tractor did not lead to those expected straight rows, and it soon became very apparent By that his calling lay elsewhere. Immersed in studying Scripture, he sensed God leading him to China. Graduating from PBI in two years, he returned to England, and from  there travelled to China under the China Inland Mission, an organization started by Hudson Taylor in 1865. 

He did score one major and unexpected benefit- marrying the farmer's daughter, sparking the first time he laid eyes on Elsie McElheran! She didn't feel it quite as quickly and he didn't tell her of his interest, not wanting to create an awkward situation while living in her family's home. Instead, he wrote her after he left, asking for her hand in marriage.

When Elsie received the letter, she took it to a trusted -as senior friend on staff at PBI who assured her that "Percy was a godly and upright man." She made the decision to follow his heart to China, God is unique wedding planner!

China Inland Mission had a stipulation that all missionaries, including the women, must complete two years of language study before getting married. This meant their wedding could take place only after Mom completed her course of studies. When Mom landed in Shanghai, she went directly to language school. Dad, having arrived earlier and skilled at language learning, was already engaged ministry. While Mom had more difficulty learning academically, she was a people person so learned more by interacting with teachers and locals. Both of them became fluent, well able to converse and teach in Mandarin.  

They lived in rural northern China for their first term where Dad was involved in tent and street evangelism, working with well-established Chinese evangelists to strengthen the churches. Alan's arrival made them a family of three before World War Il forced them to leave China. returning first to England and then to Canada. I was born in Vancouver, followed by Elsa and Ralph. 

I was about four when we returned to China after the war. Dad now taught in a Bible School, about 13 kilometers outside the city of Kunming, the capital of Yunnan Province. The campus, surrounded by rice paddies, was comprised of the main building with classrooms, as well as living quarters for students and staff. Mom did some teaching, but her main gift was Bible story telling:. Village chidren flocked to hear her while the adults listened raptly on the fringes. As kids, we were part of the audience and in a sense, part of evangelism. 

Houschold help was available, but mom never allowed a nanny to put us to bed. She tucked us in with a Bible story every night. Old and New Testaments came alive as she told us story after story. She vowed that she was not going to save other people and lose her own children. 

The Bible School students were our friends. At Christmas time, Mom let me pick out beautifully embroidered hankies for the female students and I spent a delightful time deciding which lady would get which hanky. My favorite students of course received the best ones. 

Since Elsa, Ralph and I were all pre-school when we orn in arrived in China, picking up the language was easy and we became fluent in Mandarin. Mom and Dad made English a requirement at dinner so that we wouldn't lose our first war. language. Mom diligently memorized Bible verses eters Mandarin on the bank of a nearby pond while we children chased skeeters, my name for the insects that skimmed that skimmed lightly over the surface of the water, always just out of reach.  Lacking many toys, for us playtime meant creating games ain out of our active imaginations, with each other or Chinese friends. Occasionally other missionary children from the city visited as well. 

Packages in the mail didn't arrive very often so seeing one addressed to me was very exciting, just in time for my sixth birthday! My Granny Bromley sent a lovely porcelain doll wearing a lacy white dress with matching bonnet and booties. Golden ringlets framed her face. She had long lashes, beautiful blue eyes that opened and closed, and arms and legs that moved. Although she was mine, we all played with her, even little Ralphie. A Chinese friend knit a beautiful multi-colored outfit for her and she rode in royal  style on a litter (an open chair carried between two sets of shoulders). 


Alan was already attending boarding school in North China and when I was old enough to start Grade One, it was considered too dangerous to travel due to robbers roaming the country. Transportation was an unpredictable combination of horse carts, old trucks on rutted roads, boats on the Yangtse, and anything else available. I stayed home and Mom taught Elsa and me (with Dad as our principal), anticipating that we would start school together the next year. 

Although not officially at war. China was a dangerous country, with many warloads competing for territory. On ont occasion we were warned that bandits were coming to our village and that night we fled into the rice fields to sleep under the stars. Mom assured us that "The angel of the Lord encamps around those who fear Him, and He will deliver them. " (Psalm 34:7). To our great relief, the robbers changed course and went elsewhere. The only damage was to Mom's shoes. She had tried to save them by throwing them up into the attic -- where rats made a meal of them! 

Another time, a mad man with a machete entered the house and Mom scooted us upstairs while she dealt with him ( I'm not sure how). Whether he was demented or demonic. I don't know, but it was a scary situation. 

Living on our campus, we were sheltered from most harsh realities: That is, until one day when Mom, Elsa and I were shopping in the market, a beggar woman came right up to us, her face badly disfigured from leprosy. We had never seen anyone without a nose before and it terrified us. Both of us had nightmares alter that, worried that we might catch it too. We carefully examined any new litle spot on our skin and Mom always assured us that this encounter didn't put us in danger. But in future, when leprosy was mentioned, an instant visual came to mind.

While I was spared leprosy, a major cavity in a back tooth required attention--my first dental experience. The entire procedure was performed without freezing and, riding home on a horse-draw cart, I could feel the pain of wind whistling through my mouth if I opened it. No wonder I had an erondring fear dentists! 

Communism had taken over by the time Elsa and I would have started school,so our formal education was once again delayed. Air raids targeted the city where the national forces Were fighting the communist army. While there seemed to be no imminent threat to our rural home, we dug a trench in the back yard where we'd go upon hearing planes overhead, covering our heads with pots and pans. We could hear the whine of bombs dropping, and Dad taught us how to count the seconds between when they landed and the bang when they exploded to figure out how close they were. For us it was a game, the reality far enough away so that we still felt no fear. 

We moved into the city shortly before leaving China. Successful businessmen were not compatible with communist ideology and many were executed, replaced with peasants, who were unlikely to challenge authority. Such was the fate of our landlord. As kids we didn't understand the seriousness of what was happening since Mom and Dad remained calm and shielded us from the panic. 


One day when Mom and I were on a bus the air raid siren went off and the driver abruptly stopped graveyard where we all got off and hid among the tombstones. These were considered sacred and would not be bombed. When it was over, we climbed back onto the bus and continued on home. 


It was definitely time to leave China. Life for us was getting more complicated; even simple things caused huge problems. Our clothesline was deemed very suspicious, possibly deli were eat to tee ho lie phile House? Our math Mash cards were confiscated because they too were suspect. 被怀疑. Someone, perhaps better educated, eventually returned them to us which (unfortunately) meant I had, & bgop up my math skills. Treasured photographs with beloved Chinese friends had to be destroyed to prevent them from being arrested and interrogated. Or 东滿設展 慢游器我器 citzens Cortho displeased the regime being paraded through the streets on their way to execution. While Dad had to remain at his post, Mom and us children could and should leave as soon as possible. 

Blake was born just weeks before we left China, leaving Mom with three young children plus a baby to 1089 tier. A cargo plane came available with just enough room for us in 嘴筑机身 the bucke Seare backins agathst the fuseded) I was the only sne not siek已我交 whooping cough and measles, so Mom 47 luctantly put Me if charge of the baby while she cared for Elsa and Ralph. My role as an eight- yeagold was to waich 者守看抒 over Blake, and if he turned blue with coughing, I was to call Mom. It was my first role as a caregiver. 1747/k Atart. HE%h 

Fleeing as refugees, we could only take minimal Jithbelongings so we wore as many layers of clothing (as we could put on) Our suitcases wee mostly packed with diäpers &k Wilt for Blake, as was his bunting bag, along with everything else  he needed. Regretfully, there was no room for my doll, so I gave her to my Chinese friend, Unbeknownst to me, Elsa #i st stashed the doll's hand kids this into her sujitcase. Was she hoping io find another dol to enjoy the Shalu? For my part, I never wanted to play with dolls again, my way of dealing with leaving a treasure behind.  

We were among the last missionaries to leave Chiff)ng 

As property manager fo the mission, Dad was detained by the authorities and interrogated until all business could be Kipk settled. This delayed him for three weeks, On his way out he had another narrow escape in, 8,877 Chungking. A former employee of the mission held a grudse ad would have turned Dad in to the Communists. He miraculously escaped and when they came for him the next morning he was already gone. Once again, God provided a way & 

Alan's school evacuated separately and when we arrived in Hong Kong, he was already there, waiting for us on the other side of the fence. From there we travelled to Malaysia PAR by ship to visit Dad's brother, then on j9 England to visit his mother and siblings. As our ship glided through the tropical Mediterranean, Alan was so badly sunburned that he could hardly move and had to be fed with a baby bottle. By  我選” we sailed through the Atlantic, he was again up to his mischievous self, teaching us younger siblings how to make **'Spitballs for a fight with the other kids on board. We were fascinated with our first menus, able to choose our very own meal!