《Yea, though I walk...》
Hammond & Loewen

Chapter2 

We landed in Halifax and crossed Canada by train. This was another new experience, listening to the constant clickety-clack of wheels on rail, eating in a dining car, deciding who got the upper berth and being rocked to sleep as the train swayed on. Blake now was a healthy, happy baby, passed up and down the train to many friendly strangers- certainly not done today. We eventually arrived in Three Hills and were met at the train station by relatives.  Our new home was my aunt's house close to PBI. 

Life at home was cozy though rough. Our first house didn't have indoor plumbing, so we learned to use the outhouse and keep a chamber pot for those nighttime urges. Water was trucked in and transferred to a cistern in the basement. Our weekly bath was in a galvanized tub in the kitchen with the cleanest kid going first, the water afterwards used for the garden. I helped Mom squeeze and twist the laundry by hand before we got a wringer washing machine, hanging it outside to dry all year round. During the icy winter months the sheets were stiff as a board, thawing once they contacted the warm air inside. Milk delivered to the house had to be taken in before it froze; in summer it kept cool in a pit outside as we had no refrigerator.  

Starting school in Grade 4 wasn't easy. Mom prepared me, stating that I would be ahead of my classmates in many ways because of my overseas experiences, but behind in other areas.  'Behind' proved most painful in music class. I had no previous knowledge so notes and rests, clefs and harmony meant nothing to me. On my first report card I received an F, the only failure I ever had in many years of education.  

Sports brought more agony. Everyone knew how to play baseball, that is, except for me. Being ambidextrous didn't help. I learned to throw left handed, but I was taught to bat right handed. All the mitts were right handed, so I dreaded trying to catch the ball without any protection. I hated being picked last as nobody wanted me on their team, and it was a relief when another missionary kid replaced me at the bottom. With winter came skating. Having no money to buy skates, I was given a pair of old hand-me-downs that didn't fit. Anyway, I didn't understand the appeal of frozen feet  Yea, Though I Walk...wobbly ankles. I could walk or ride a bike for miles as, without a car, this was our mode of transportation. 

Despite feeling shy, I did make friends, happy to chum with the chatty girls so all I needed to do was listen. I tried to please everyone and often made decisions based on what I thought others wanted, suppressing my own desires. Life went on and I gradually acclimatized to my new life in Canada.   

Mom's story-telling talents were favorites among the grade school students, and I particularly remember her telling the crucifixion and Easter stories. Her dramatic presentation through voice and gestures held us all spellbound. I've always maintained that at least a third of my Bible knowledge came from her stories. 

She was less inclined to tell stories about China. Escaping as refugees was a very traumatic time for her and she never talked about it except to my grandmother. Occasionally we learned a few details if we overheard her encouraging someone else going through a difficult experience. Mom vowed she would never stifle laughter in our household after seeing the smiles wiped off all Chinese faces by the cruelties of communism.  

My early spiritual journey was rather rocky. Although I don't recall the details, I believe Mom led me to the Lord when I was really young. When we came to Three Hills after leaving China, there was a lot of emphasis on have you been saved? and do you have assurance of salvation? This scared me. Unlike people who had very specific memories of time and place, I didn't have any huge sins to confess and because I was already a 'good little girl,' there was no dramatic change in my life. 

Now I became uncertain that I'd made this important decision. I was confused by the adult language imposed on me, anguishing over whether I had not done it 'right' or even at all. Mom cautioned me about repeatedly asking Jesus into my life, assuring me that once I asked Him to come in, He was there to stay. I later realized that Jesus came into my life as a little girl and I 'just climbed onto His lap.' 

Jack was born in February of our first year in Canada while Dad was in Jamaica on an assignment. That meant six children for Mom to care for, and I as the big sister needed to step up. Jack was 'my baby' and I learned everything about caring for him. 

As the years rolled on, I continued to care for my younger siblings and was put in charge of the house when Mom needed a break and went to visit Grandma. Cooking  Yea, Though I Walk. and cleaning took on a new meaning when Mom became deathly ill with paint poisoning. I was thirteen and dropped out of school to care for her and the household. 

Dad and Mom loved us passionately, but they weren't demonstrative in their affection. To my surprise, after Mom got better, one day she called me over to her rocking chair and pulled me onto her lap, big girl that I was. She rocked me gently saying, "I'm so sorry that I have had to depend on you so much. I really appreciate everything you have done." She felt she had robbed me of some of my childhood, but I felt a warm glow in my heart. Her words made everything worthwhile. 

I attended Prairie for all grades, elementary through high school, followed by four years of Bible School. In addition to singing in choirs, piano lessons were part of my musical education and although I reached Grade 9 Royal Conservatory, I felt stretched beyond my ability. The next year I switched to accordion--a huge relief to be a beginner where mistakes were expected. I had no way of knowing the unexpected role a musical background would play in my as yet undetermined career. 

With university on the horizon, I was unclear about what path to take, given the three choices most women made at that time: teaching, secretarial, or nursing. I didn't want to be a secretary, and I wasn't sure I could handle shift work  and night duty as a nurse -which left teaching as the best option. But was this a good fit? When I asked a friend's opinion, her candid response of "You'd make a good housewife!" was totally deflating. I was paying tuition to become something other than that! 

Money was not a major issue in our household. PBI paid a paltry salary but provided us with a home. Mom was both a great cook and manager, and we always had nutritious- and delicious-_meals. She was also an excellent seamstress and could transform 'missionary barrel' items into attractive clothing. Our twice-yearly shopping trips to Calgary took care of other necessities. A rural lifestyle had simple needs and our friends and neighbors lived much the same way as our family. At university, I learned for the first time about the poverty line and suddenly realized that I had lived below it all my life! And now as a student earning my way through university, I had no time or money to think about wants. 

There was, however, something less tangible intruding on my concentration. The question of salvation had long been settled in my mind, but I was still dissatisfied with my relationship with God. Something was missing. I longed for greater intimacy, but was this new *Charismatic Movement,' as it was referred to in the '60s, the way to go? It was characterized by speaking in tongues, a foreign and rather  Yea, Though I Walk... fearful concept for me. Wild stories reenforced my reservations although my mother had experienced this 'gift: resulting in great blessing. My father, on the other hand, had not. They were both godly people, which proved to me that both were acceptable to God. 

I felt Him gently prompting me to be open to this new phenomenon. My response was I'm not ready! Or at least Not now! This was tantamount to an unequivocal No! A chill seeped into my walk with God as He taught me the consequences of disobedience. I longed for our former fellowship, but I couldn't just 'flip a switch.' Two long years and many miles later it was restored. 

At university I took all the general courses and after two years was qualified to teach, soon realizing how much I enjoyed working with the elementary grades. My first year, however, was a total mess and I was often asked why I didn't quit. I wasn't sure. Was I stupid or stubborn? Or both? 

I started with a grade five-six class for two weeks, then moved to a new school and a grade three-four mix. We were assigned to the art room with no desks, only tables for the students. Half the kids were printing, the other half writing. At Christmas a third of my students were moved to another new school, leaving me with only grade fours. Amid all the confusion, I was asked to teach French, which I had never  learned. Fortunately, I was able to switch with another teacher, who didn't want to teach Bible (yes, it was part of the public school curriculum in 1967). 

Prospects for my second year seemed ideal. I was assigned to teach social studies to grade fours (my favorite level) when just before school started, the principal asked if I would teach music. Whaaaat? The new music teacher was an American and there was some difficulty in her coming into Canada. If I declined, the entire school would have to revert back to our old system of teaching by grade versus teaching by subject. 

Unwilling to be responsible for reversing progress, I taught music, with no advance notice or ability to develop a curriculum. It was a stretch for my alto voice to be singing children's high-pitched songs. Ranging from grades one to six, the younger ones were fun to teach but the older ones were definitely a challenge. 

I was also taking summer school courses to finish my B.Ed. degree and get my permanent certificate. One day on campus, a student involved with Inter-Varsity Christian Fellowship invited me to a weekend missions conference. I couldn't really afford the fee, however sensed in my spirit that I needed to go so I signed up. A friend of mine had put together a file of worldwide mission opportunities and how  to be involved. Having grown up at Prairie, none of this was new information, but for many others it was an amazing concept. The keynote speaker was from Overseas Missionary Fellowship (OMF), and after the evening program, I introduced myself to him. 

He shared a message with me that he'd just received from the Philippines: they needed a teacher right away. 

"Your sister is a teacher, isn't she?" 
"Yes." 
"They need someone for a year while the present teacher is on furlough. Do you think Elsa would be interested?" 
"What would she be teaching?" 
"Elementary." 
"Well, Elsa teaches high school; I'm the elementary teacher. Tell me more!" 

He had no idea where he would find someone on short notice, but the need was desperate. They would even pay someone to take the position--which never happens in missions where workers must raise their own support. 

What he didn't know was that I had some strong reservations. PBl's strong mission emphasis carried an underlying assumption that if you didn't become a missionary, you 'hadn't quite made it.' At university I was faced with a missionary-go-home sentiment, raising the  question Are missions obsolete? Were missionaries destroying native culture- -or trying to Americanize the cultures? No doubt, missionaries had made mistakes. Are missions still relevant? And if so, should they still be conducted the same as always? Or should missionaries, in fact, just go home? These questions needed an answer. 

If I were to go, I needed three conditions met: 
    1. My mission experience needed to be short term- -a trial period. This was a one-year commitment. 
    2. I didn't want to learn another language if I wasn't going to stay. This would be teaching in English. 
    3. I was a cash-strapped student; they would pay my expenses.

Without batting an eye, I knew this was meant for me, even without the three days he gave me to think about it. I was still taking the university courses, but since they needed me right away, I boarded a plane right after my last exam, skipping all the usual orientation and training,