《Yea, though I walk...》
Hammond & Loewen

chapter3    

Chefoo  Philippines  was  a  boarding  school  for  missionary kids from many different countries, locate;  in a beautiful, secluded setting on one of the islands, right  across from a beach. I was the only teacher in this one-room  school with eight kids from grades one to five. English  seemed to be the only thing we had in common, presenting  many challenges for a relatively new teacher.  

Each nationality represented required an education  fitting that student's country: British currency was in pounds  and pence; Canadians and Americans used dollars and cents.  Some measured in metric, others in feet and inches. Spelling,  pronunciation,  and vocabulary varied between British,  American, and Australian students. Each pupil needed  his/her own penmanship book in order to learn his country's  style. For social studies, I taught the whole class about the  country of the next furloughing family.    

The students and staff lived in the same building. Over  the years, I was used to sharing a room, either with siblings  or later with roommates while attending university. But here,  although we were in each other's spaces a lot, I had my own  room. After the kids had gone off to bed, I was on my own.  

Growing up in China had prepared me for Philippine  culture in ways others had difficulty adjusting to. I wasn't  afraid of crowded streets or going to the market where  business was conducted through aggressive bargaining. I'd  already learned never to accept the ticket price. Merchants  considered it bad luck to miss the first sale of the day, so to  ensure a good deal it was best to shop early. Cunning thieves  were always ready to target the unwary, and we knew that  cash was best kept tightly secured and out of sight, along  with watches and jewelry. 

By the time I went to the Philippines, friends and family  had almost given up on me ever getting married. Like most  girls I had dreams of living happily-ever-after, but I couldn't  live life on 'hold'  until I met the right person. I enjoyed  adventure, and being a missionary kid myself, teaching in  the Philippines showed me the other side of the coin,  learning the agonies parents faced in sending their children  away to boarding school.    

Evenings were lonely as everything shut down after  dinner, and I often played my accordion and sang to fill quig  hours.  

I had become friends with a young Swiss couple and  immediately sensed a  depth in their  walk with God  something I'd been searching for in my longing for more of  His presence. They had met God in a wonderful way through  a  *charismatic experience' (that thing' I feared!) but they  were so down-to-earth, so beautiful in how they lived their  lives that I was drawn to them despite my reservations. In  bringing me here, for the first time in my life I was separated  from my friends, my roots, and all the things that had  mattered to me. Now I was completely on my own and  needed God as never before.  

He came through in a powerful spiritual experience. I  didn't know quite what to expect now. Was I going to be a  great evangelist? That didn't happen but God was so much  more real to me than ever before and He was saying I just  want you to be the best YOU that you can be.  

At this time God impressed on me that I would be  married someday, but I thought, Now I'm more satisfied than  I've ever been. I don't need to get married. Besides, God.  you're my husband! I don't need anybody else.    

He assured me, not just that He was my husband, but that  He would give me a husband. It was very clear. For the next  25 years I alternated between trusting that Mr. Right would  cross my path when the time was right, wondering Where is  he? and putting it out of mind altogether, carrying on with  doing what I was doing.  

When other girls talked to me about frustrations of being  single, I could relate. Still, I had a calm, unwavering  assurance about what God had told me. Someday He would  show me what He meant.

Although the original plan was a one-year term, I was  invited to stay another year. The school needed to move to  another island, this time 5000 feet above sea level and a  much cooler climate. The move meant dismantling the first  school, then setting up in the new location. It seemed like my  teaching career was one mess after another. Meanwhile, the  teacher I had initially replaced came back and we divided the  children into two classes.  

Besides teaching, I had much to learn about this  environment. In the Philippine culture one never travels  alone. As a Westerner I was brought up to be independent  and to do things on my own. I loved the Tagalog word  kasama-the person you do life with. People always asked,    Who is your kasama?" What a lovely picture of the Hon,  Spirit I still think of Him as my kasama, my life companion.  

During holiday breaks I volunteered to escort schoy  children home so that I could learn more of country an  culture. Some lived among tribal people and on one tip  experienced Communion. We picked a certain leaf off a bug,  and curled it into a cup; mine leaked- badly. The bread  was their local staple and their wine' an unfamiliar drink  but the meaning was evident, broadening my understanding  of the Body of Christ.  

I was prepared to stay longer but sensed God saying thal  my time in the Philippines was coming to a close. While I'd  had misgivings about coming here in the first place, there  were even  more about going home. When you're a  missionary, God looks after you. If you go home and are no  longer a missionary, will God still look after you? I think this  was something God was wanting to teach me-that He  would be there for me, even in my own back yard. Another  consideration-  -my deep experience  of God, including  speaking in tongues, was incompatible with the OMF  leadership's position. I saw this as a potential area of conflict  and knew it was time to leave. I was heading back to Canada  with no job in sight, little money and only temporary  accommodation.    

After living in the Philippines on almost nothing and  seeing extreme poverty all around me, it was hard adjusting  to life in Canada. What other people accepted as ordinary,  for me was extravagance. While living in a foreign country  requires many adaptations to one's idea of 'normal.' I  discovered that reverse culture shock could be even more  difficult. It started on the way home from the airport when  we stopped at The Bay. I felt overwhelmed seeing row upon  row of coffee mugs on display. How many different varieties  of mugs is enough? In the Philippines you might get a tin cup  or, at most, a few choices. It was my first indication of  adjustments to come.  

I had left Canada before pantsuits were in style and  returned to women wearing them to church! I had lost two  years of Canadian culture; I didn't fit anymore. Even going  out for dinner and a movie made me uncomfortable.  Painfully mindful of the have-nots of my recent experience,  I wasn't willing to spend so much on myself.  

In the two years I'd been away, my sister had gone from  being a poor student to earning a good income and living in  a pleasant apartment with beautiful furnishings. I had only  the contents of my suitcases. It was hard to reconcile these  differences, and I had to remind myself that God had called  me to my lifestyle. He had called Elsa to something totally    different. It was not for me to judge. Even so, I struggl,  with what was right to have, what I couldn't have, and wa  Ishould have. While awareness of economic disparily y  remained throughout my life, over the years I have comey  terms with the North American lifesiple while asking Cor,  keep me mindful of those surviving with so much less.  

For the first month, I holed up in my sister's apartmen  wondering what was next. I knew I'd been directed to come  home but beyond that the future was still blank. I checked al  the newspaper ads, wondering if I should look for something  outside of teaching. Perhaps move out of Calgary? At the  end of that month, I saw an ad for a teaching position at the  Hebrew School. Although there were Jewish teachers on  staff, they also liked having non-Jewish teachers who didn't  know the political machinations such as which kids should  receive favored treatment. I knew nothing. They needed a  music teacher, and I had the qualifications, so I was hired. It  was interesting from my Bible background to work in a  school where the Torah and Hebrew music were focal points.  

Once again, I was teaching music,  this time for  elementary and junior high grades. And once again, it was  extremely difficult. Music for younger levels was fun, bul  my junior high students came to music class only as am  alternative to art or study hall. While some were already advanced musicians, others knew nothing. Developing a  program combining the disparity in interest and abilities was  almost impossible. It turned out to be my last year of  teaching in the typical sense.  

In a way, this was the hardest year of my career so far.  When I was in the Philippines, people prayed for me as their  missionary, but when I came home, they thought that I was  safe and no longer needed that kind of support. I felt that I  was under spiritual attack without prayer backing, even  though I was doing all the right things.